feat(how-to, integrations/hitl): create hitl group, update links and add guide (#428)
botpress/docs: integrations/integration-guides/hitl/time-to-first-agent-response.mdx

---
title: Measure HITL Response Time
description: Measure the Time to First Agent Response for conversations in HITL.
sidebarTitle: Measure HITL Response Time
---

## Prerequisites

<Info>
  You will need:

  - A [Botpress Plus plan](https://botpress.com/pricing) or higher
  - The [HITL integration and plugin configured](/integrations/integration-guides/hitl/introduction) so agents can join conversations
</Info>

This guide explains how to measure the **Time to First Agent Response** for conversations handed off to a human agent via [Human-in-the-Loop (HITL)](/integrations/integration-guides/hitl/introduction). The metric captures how long a user waited from the moment they requested a human agent to the moment an agent was assigned. 

> The result is stored as a formatted string in a conversation variable and can be displayed in a Text card, forwarded to a server, or saved to a Botpress table.

Reviewer: link to appropriate documentation for these sections:

```suggestion
The result is stored as a formatted string in a conversation variable and can be sent using a [Text Card](/studio/concepts/cards/send-messages#text), [sent to an external system(/studio/concepts/cards/execute-code), or [saved to a Botpress table](/studio/concepts/cards/tables#insert-record).
```

Author: updated

## 1. Create conversation variables

<Steps titleSize="h3">
  <Step title="Add the variables">
    Create the following two variables in your bot, scoped as **Conversation** variables:

    | Variable Name           | Type   | Description                                            |
    | :---------------------- | :----- | :----------------------------------------------------- |
    | `hitlRequestTimestamp`  | number | Unix timestamp (ms) of when the HITL request was made |
    | `hitlTimingDisplay`     | string | Formatted summary string of the timing result          |

    In Botpress Studio, go to **Variables** → **+ New Variable**, set the scope to **Conversation**, and configure each entry as described above.
  </Step>
</Steps>

## 2. Capture the request timestamp

> Before your **Start HITL** card, insert an **Execute Code** card that records when the user was handed off to HITL:

Reviewer: here and generally throughout this guide, you should only bold actual clickable UI buttons, like **Accept** or **Confirm**. concepts or non-clickable elements don't need bolding

<Steps titleSize="h3">

>   <Step title="Add an Execute Code card">

Reviewer: here and in the rest of the guide, Card should be capitalized

    Add an **Execute Code** card before the **Start HITL** card and use the following code:

    ```js
    conversation.hitlRequestTimestamp = Date.now()
    ```

>     This stores the exact moment the user was handed off to HITL, in milliseconds since the Unix epoch.

Reviewer: consider linking to an explanation of unix time here

Author: done, lemme know if the source is fine

          `HITL Request Time: ${fmt(requestTime)}\n` +
          `HITL Assignment Time: ${fmt(assignedTime)}\n` +
          `Wait Time: ${diffMins}m ${diffSecs}s`
      }
    }
    ```
  </Step>
  <Step title="What this code does">
    - Fetches the upstream conversation using the current conversation ID.
    - Resolves the downstream HITL conversation via the `hitl#downstream` tag (set automatically by Botpress when a handoff is initiated).
    - Reads the `hitl:assignedAt` tag from the downstream conversation (timestamp of when an agent accepted and assigned).
    - Computes the wait time between the request and assignment.
    - Formats and stores the result in `conversation.hitlTimingDisplay`.
  </Step>
</Steps>

Once the code runs, `conversation.hitlTimingDisplay` will contain a message in this format:

```
HITL Request Time: 8:28:07 PM
HITL Assignment Time: 8:28:31 PM
Wait Time: 0m 24s
```

<Note>
  Times are displayed in the America/New_York timezone. Update the `timeZone` value in the `fmt` function if your team operates in a different timezone.
</Note>

## 4. Use the data

The `conversation.hitlTimingDisplay` variable is available for the rest of your Workflow. You can:

> - **Display it in chat**: Add a **Text** card and reference `{{conversation.hitlTimingDisplay}}` to send the summary to the conversation (useful for testing and QA).

Reviewer: same as the first comment, link to relevant docs

- **Log it to a Botpress Table**: Use an **Update Table Row** or **Insert Table Row** card to persist the data for reporting.
- **Send it to an external system**: Use an **Execute Code** card with an `axios` or `fetch` call to forward the values to your analytics platform, CRM, or data warehouse.

<Check>

>   You can now measure Time to First Agent Response for HITL conversations and use the result in your bot flow, tables, or external systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can now measure Time to First Agent Response for HITL conversations and use the result in your Workflows, tables, or external systems.
```
